---
layout: default
title: "AWKLISP v1.2"
tags: [dsl, awklisp, lisp, scheme, external_links]
---

# {{ page.title }}

## Download from

+ [LAWKER][1]
+ [Github][2]

## Synopsis
 
{% highlight sh %}
awk [-v profiling=1] -f awklisp [optional-Lisp-source-files]
{% endhighlight %}

The \-v profiling=1 option turns call-count profiling on.

If you want to use it interactively, be sure to include '\-' (for the
standard input) among the source files. For example:

{% highlight sh %}
gawk -f awklisp startup numbers lists -
{% endhighlight %}

## Description

### Overview

This program arose out of one-upmanship. At my previous job I had to
use MapBasic, an interpreter so astoundingly slow (around 100 times
slower than GWBASIC) that one must wonder if it itself is implemented
in an interpreted language. I still wonder, but it clearly could be:
a bare-bones Lisp in awk, hacked up in a few hours, ran substantially
faster. Since then I've added features and polish, in the hope of taking
over the burgeoning market for stately language implementations.

This version tries to deal with as many of the essential issues in
interpreter implementation as is reasonable in awk (though most would
call this program utterly unreasonable from start to finish, perhaps...).
Awk's impoverished control structures put error recovery and tail-call
optimization out of reach, in that I can't see a non-painful way to
code them. The scope of variables is dynamic because that was easier to
implement efficiently. Subject to all those constraints, the language is
as Schemely as I could make it: it has a single namespace with uniform
evaluation of expressions in the function and argument positions, and
the Scheme names for primitives and special forms.

The rest of this file is a reference manual. My favorite tutorial would
be *The Little LISPer* (see section 5, References); don't let the cute
name and the cartoons turn you off, because it's a really excellent book
with some mind-stretching material towards the end. All of its code will
work with awklisp, except for the last two chapters. (You'd be better
off learning with a serious Lisp implementation, of course.)

For more details on the implementation, see the *Implementation notes*
(below).

### Examples

#### fib.lsp

Code:

{% highlight lisp %}
(define fib
  (lambda (n)
    (if (< n 2)
        1
        (+ (fib (- n 1))
           (fib (- n 2))))))
(fib 20)
{% endhighlight %}

Comamnd line:

{% highlight sh %}
gawk -f awklisp startup numbers  lists fib.lsp
{% endhighlight %}

Output:

	10946

#### Eliza

Here are the standard ELIZA dialogue patterns:

	(define rules
	  '(((hello)
	     (How do you do -- please state your problem))
	    ((I want)
	     (What would it mean if you got -R-)
	     (Why do you want -R-)
	     (Suppose you got -R- soon))
	    ((if)
	     (Do you really think its likely that -R-)
	     (Do you wish that -R-)
	     (What do you think about -R-)
	     (Really-- if -R-))
	    ((I was)
	     (Were you really?)
	     (Perhaps I already knew you were -R-)
	     (Why do you tell me you were -R- now?))
	    ((I am)
	     (In what way are you -R-)
	     (Do you want to be -R-))
	    ((because)
	     (Is that the real reason?)
	     (What other reasons might there be?)
	     (Does that reason seem to explain anything else?))
	    ((I feel)
	     (Do you often feel -R-))
	    ((I felt)
	     (What other feelings do you have?))
	    ((yes)
	     (You seem quite positive)
	     (You are sure)
	     (I understand))
	    ((no)
	     (Why not?)
	     (You are being a bit negative)
	     (Are you saying no just to be negative?))
	    ((someone)
	     (Can you be more specific?))
	    ((everyone)
	     (Surely not everyone)
	     (Can you think of anyone in particular?)
	     (Who for example?)
	     (You are thinking of a special person))
	    ((perhaps)
	     (You do not seem quite certain))
	    ((are)
	     (Did you think they might not be -R-)
	     (Possibly they are -R-))
	    (()
	     (Very interesting)
	     (I am not sure I understand you fully)
	     (What does that suggest to you?)
	     (Please continue)
	     (Go on)
	     (Do you feel strongly about discussing such things?))))

Command line:

{% highlight sh %}
gawk -f awklisp startup numbers  lists eliza.lsp -
{% endhighlight %}

Interaction:

	> (eliza)
	Hello-- please state your problem 
	> (I feel sick)
	Do you often feel sick 
	> (I am in love with awk)
	In what way are you in love with awk 
	> (because it is so easy to use)
	Is that the real reason? 
	> (I was laughed at by the other kids at space camp)
	Were you really? 
	> (everyone hates me)
	Can you think of anyone in particular? 
	> (everyone at space camp)
	Surely not everyone 
	> (perhaps not tina fey)
	You do not seem quite certain 
	> (I want her to laugh at me)
	What would it mean if you got her to laugh at me 
 
### Expressions and their evaluation

Lisp evaluates expressions, which can be simple (atoms) or compound
(lists).

An atom is a string of characters, which can be letters, digits, and
most punctuation; the characters may \-not\- include spaces, quotes,
parentheses, brackets, '.', '\#', or ';' (the comment character). In
this Lisp, case is significant ( X is different from x ).

+ Atoms: atom 42 1/137 + ok? hey:names-with-dashes-are-easy-to-read
+ Not atoms: don't-include-quotes (or spaces or parentheses)

A list is a '(', followed by zero or more objects (each of which is an
atom or a list), followed by a ')'.

+ Lists: `() (a list of atoms) ((a list) of atoms (and lists))`
+ Not lists: `) ((()) (two) (lists)`

The special object nil is both an atom and the empty list. That is, nil
&#61; (). A non-nil list is called a -pair-, because it is represented by
a pair of pointers, one to the first element of the list (its -car-),
and one to the rest of the list (its -cdr-). For example, the car of
((a list) of stuff) is (a list), and the cdr is (of stuff). It's also
possible to have a pair whose cdr is not a list; the pair with car A
and cdr B is printed as (A . B).

That's the syntax of programs and data. Now let's consider their
meaning. You can use Lisp like a calculator: type in an expression,
and Lisp prints its value. If you type 25, it prints 25. If you type (+
2 2), it prints 4. In general, Lisp evaluates a particular expression
in a particular environment (set of variable bindings) by following
this algorithm:

+ If the expression is a number, return that number.
+ If the expression is a non-numeric atom (a -symbol-), return the value
  of that symbol in the current environment. If the symbol is currently
  unbound, that's an error.
+ Otherwise the expression is a list. If its car is one of the
  symbols: quote, lambda, if, begin, while, set!, or define, then the
  expression is a -special- -form-, handled by special rules. Otherwise
  it's just a procedure call, handled like this: evaluate each element
  of the list in the current environment, and then apply the operator
  (the value of the car) to the operands (the values of the rest of the
  list's elements). For example, to evaluate (+ 2 3), we first evaluate
  each of its subexpressions: the value of + is (at least in the initial
  environment) the primitive procedure that adds, the value of 2 is 2,
  and the value of 3 is 3. Then we call the addition procedure with 2
  and 3 as arguments, yielding 5. For another example, take (- (+ 2 3)
  1). Evaluating each subexpression gives the subtraction procedure, 5,
  and 1. Applying the procedure to the arguments gives 4.

We'll see all the primitive procedures in the next section. A user-defined
procedure is represented as a list of the form (lambda &lt;parameters&gt;
&lt;body&gt;), such as (lambda (x) (+ x 1)). To apply such a procedure,
evaluate its body in the environment obtained by extending the current
environment so that the parameters are bound to the corresponding
arguments. Thus, to apply the above procedure to the argument 41,
evaluate (+ x 1) in the same environment as the current one except that
x is bound to 41.

If the procedure's body has more than one expression -- e.g., (lambda ()
(write 'Hello) (write 'world!)) -- evaluate them each in turn, and return
the value of the last one.

We still need the rules for special forms. They are:

+ The value of (quote &lt;x>) is &lt;x>. There's a shorthand for this
  form: '&lt;x&gt;.  E.g., the value of '(+ 2 2) is (+ 2 2), -not- 4.
+ (lambda &lt;parameters&gt; &lt;body&gt;) returns itself: e.g., the
  value of (lambda (x) x) is (lambda (x) x).
+ To evaluate (if &lt;test-expr&gt; &lt;then-exp&gt; &lt;else-exp&gt;),
  first evaluate &lt;test-expr&gt;. If the value is true (non-nil),
  then return the value of &lt;then-exp&gt;, otherwise return the value of
  &lt;else-exp&gt;. (&lt;else-exp&gt; is optional; if it's left out, pretend
  there's a nil there.) Example: (if nil 'yes 'no) returns no.
+ To evaluate (begin &lt;expr-1&gt; &lt;expr-2&gt;...), evaluate each
  of the subexpressions in order, returning the value of the last one.
+ To evaluate (while &lt;test&gt; &lt;expr-1&gt; &lt;expr-2&gt;...),
  first evaluate &lt;test&gt;. If it's nil, return nil. Otherwise,
  evaluate &lt;expr-1&gt;, &lt;expr-2&gt;,... in order, and then repeat.
+ To evaluate (set! &lt;variable&gt; &lt;expr&gt;), evaluate &lt;expr&gt;,
  and then set the value of &lt;variable&gt; in the current environment to
  the result. If the variable is currently unbound, that's an error. The
  value of the whole set! expression is the value of &lt;expr&gt;.
+ (define &lt;variable&gt; &lt;expr&gt;) is like set!, except it's used to
  introduce new bindings, and the value returned is &lt;variable&gt;.

It's possible to define new special forms using the macro facility
provided in the startup file. The macros defined there are:

+
  {% highlight lisp %}
(let ((&lt;var> &lt;expr>)...)
  &lt;body>...)</pre>
  Bind each &lt;var> to its corresponding &lt;expr> (evaluated in the current
  environment), and evaluate &lt;body> in the resulting environment.
  {% endhighlight %}
+ 
  {% highlight lisp %}
(cond (&lt;test-expr> &lt;result-expr>...)... (else &lt;result-expr>...))
  {% endhighlight %}
  
  where the final else clause is optional. Evaluate each
  &lt;test-expr> in turn, and for the first non-nil result, evaluate
  its &lt;result-expr>. If none are non-nil, and there's no else clause,
  return nil.
 
+ `(and <expr>...)`
 
  Evaluate each &lt;expr&gt; in order, until one returns nil; then return
  nil. If none are nil, return the value of the last &lt;expr&gt;.
 
+ `(or <expr>...)`
 
  Evaluate each &lt;expr&gt; in order, until one returns non-nil; return
  that value.  If all are nil, return nil.
 
### Built-in procedures
 
#### List operations:

+ (null? &lt;x>) returns true (non-nil) when &lt;x> is nil.
+ (atom? &lt;x>) returns true when &lt;x> is an atom.
+ (pair? &lt;x>) returns true when &lt;x> is a pair.
+ (car &lt;pair>) returns the car of &lt;pair>.
+ (cdr &lt;pair>) returns the cdr of &lt;pair>.
+ (cadr &lt;pair>) returns the car of the cdr of &lt;pair>. (i.e., the second element.)
+ (cddr &lt;pair>) returns the cdr of the cdr of &lt;pair>.
+ (cons &lt;x> &lt;y>) returns a new pair whose car is &lt;x> and whose cdr is &lt;y>.
+ (list &lt;x>...) returns a list of its arguments.
+ (set-car! &lt;pair> &lt;x>) changes the car of &lt;pair> to &lt;x>.
+ (set-cdr! &lt;pair> &lt;x>) changes the cdr of &lt;pair> to &lt;x>.
+ (reverse! &lt;list>) reverses &lt;list> in place, returning the result.

#### Numbers:

+ (number? &lt;x>) returns true when &lt;x> is a number.
+ (+ &lt;n> &lt;n>) returns the sum of its arguments.
+ (- &lt;n> &lt;n>) returns the difference of its arguments.
+ (* &lt;n> &lt;n>) returns the product of its arguments.
+ (quotient &lt;n> &lt;n>) returns the quotient. Rounding is towards zero.
+ (remainder &lt;n> &lt;n>) returns the remainder.
+ (&lt; &lt;n1> &lt;n2>) returns true when &lt;n1> is less than &lt;n2>.

#### I/O:

+ (write &lt;x>) writes &lt;x> followed by a space.
+ (newline) writes the newline character.
+ (read) reads the next expression from standard input and returns it.

#### Meta-operations:

+ (eval &lt;x>) evaluates &lt;x> in the current environment, returning the result.
+ (apply &lt;proc> &lt;list>) calls &lt;proc> with arguments &lt;list>,
  returning the result.

#### Miscellany:

+ (eq? &lt;x> &lt;y>) returns true when &lt;x> and &lt;y> are the same
  object. Be careful using eq? with lists, because (eq? (cons &lt;x>
  &lt;y>) (cons &lt;x> &lt;y>)) is false.
+ (put &lt;x> &lt;y> &lt;z>)
+ (get &lt;x> &lt;y>) returns the last value &lt;z> that was put for
  &lt;x> and &lt;y>, or nil if there is no such value.
+ (symbol? &lt;x>) returns true when &lt;x> is a symbol.
+ (gensym) returns a new symbol distinct from all symbols that can
  be read.
+ (random &lt;n>) returns a random integer between 0 and &lt;n>-1 (if
  &lt;n> is positive).
+ (error &lt;x>...) writes its arguments and aborts with error code 1.

### Implementation Notes
 
#### Overview
 
Since the code should be self-explanatory to anyone knowledgeable
about Lisp implementation, these notes assume you know Lisp but not
interpreters. I haven't got around to writing up a complete discussion
of everything, though.

The code for an interpreter can be pretty low on redundancy \-\- this
is natural because the whole reason for implementing a new language is
to avoid having to code a particular class of programs in a redundant
style in the old language. We implement what that class of programs has
in common just once, then use it many times. Thus an interpreter has
a different style of code, perhaps denser, than a typical application
program.
 
#### Data representation

Conceptually, a Lisp datum is a tagged pointer, with the tag giving the
datatype and the pointer locating the data. We follow the common practice
of encoding the tag into the two lowest-order bits of the pointer. This
is especially easy in awk, since arrays with non-consecutive indices
are just as efficient as dense ones (so we can use the tagged pointer
directly as an index, without having to mask out the tag bits). (But,
by the way, mawk accesses negative indices much more slowly than positive
ones, as I found out when trying a different encoding.)

This Lisp provides three datatypes: integers, lists, and symbols. (A
modern Lisp provides many more.)

For an integer, the tag bits are zero and the pointer bits are simply the
numeric value; thus, N is represented by N*4. This choice of the tag value
has two advantages. First, we can add and subtract without fiddling with
the tags. Second, negative numbers fit right in.  (Consider what would
happen if N were represented by 1+N*4 instead, and we tried to extract
the tag as N%4, where N may be either positive or negative. Because of
this problem and the above-mentioned inefficiency of negative indices,
all other datatypes are represented by positive numbers.)
 
#### The evaluation/saved-bindings stack

The following is from an email discussion; it doesn't develop everything
from first principles but is included here in the hope it will be helpful.

Hi. I just took a look at awklisp, and remembered that there's more
to your question about why we need a stack -- it's a good question.
The real reason is because a stack is accessible to the garbage collector.

We could have had apply() evaluate the arguments itself, and stash the
results into variables like arg0 and arg1 -- then the case for ADD would
look like

	if (proc == ADD) return is(a_number, arg0) + is(a_number, arg1)

The obvious problem with that approach is how to handle calls to
user-defined procedures, which could have any number of arguments.
Say we're evaluating ((lambda (x) (+ x 1)) 42). (lambda (x) (+ x 1))
is the procedure, and 42 is the argument.

A (wrong) solution could be to evaluate each argument in turn, and bind
the corresponding parameter name (like x in this case) to the resulting
value (while saving the old value to be restored after we return from the
procedure). This is wrong because we must not change the variable bindings
until we actually enter the procedure -- for example, with that algorithm
((lambda (x y) y) 1 x) would return 1, when it should return whatever
the value of x is in the enclosing environment. (The eval_rands()-type
sequence would be: eval the 1, bind x to 1, eval the x -- yielding 1
which is *wrong* -- and bind y to that, then eval the body of the lambda.)

Okay, that's easily fixed -- evaluate all the operands and stash them
away somewhere until you're done, and *then* do the bindings. So the
question is where to stash them. How about a global array? Like

	for (i = 0; arglist != NIL; ++i) {
	    global_temp[i] = eval(car[arglist])
	    arglist = cdr[arglist]
	}

followed by the equivalent of extend_env(). This will not do, because
the global array will get clobbered in recursive calls to eval().
Consider (+ 2 (* 3 4)) -- first we evaluate the arguments to the +,
like this: global_temp\[0\] gets 2, and then global_temp\[1\] gets the
eval of (* 3 4). But in evaluating (* 3 4), global_temp\[0\] gets set
to 3 and global_temp\[1\] to 4 -- so the original assignment of 2 to
global_temp\[0\] is clobbered before we get a chance to use it. By using
a stack\[\] instead of a global_temp\[\], we finesse this problem.

You may object that we can solve that by just making the global array
local, and that's true; lots of small local arrays may or may not be
more efficient than one big global stack, in awk -- we'd have to try
it out to see. But the real problem I alluded to at the start of this
message is this: the garbage collector has to be able to find all the
live references to the car\[\] and cdr\[\] arrays. If some of those
references are hidden away in local variables of recursive procedures,
we're stuck. With the global stack, they're all right there for the gc().

(In C we could use the local-arrays approach by threading a chain of
pointers from each one to the next; but awk doesn't have pointers.)

(You may wonder how the code gets away with having a number of local
variables holding lisp values, then -- the answer is that in every such
case we can be sure the garbage collector can find the values in question
from some other source. That's what this comment is about:

	  # All the interpretation routines have the precondition that their
	  # arguments are protected from garbage collection.

In some cases where the values would not otherwise be guaranteed to be
available to the gc, we call protect().)

Oh, there's another reason why apply() doesn't evaluate the arguments
itself: it's called by do_apply(), which handles lisp calls like (apply
car '((x))) -- where we *don't* want the x to get evaluated by apply().
 
## References

+ Harold Abelson and Gerald J. Sussman, with Julie Sussman.  Structure and
  Interpretation of Computer Programs. MIT Press, 1985.
+ John Allen. Anatomy of Lisp. McGraw-Hill, 1978.
+ Daniel P. Friedman and Matthias Felleisen. The Little LISPer. Macmillan,
  1989.

Roger Rohrbach wrote a Lisp interpreter, in old awk (which has no
procedures!), called walk . It can't do as much as this Lisp, but it
certainly has greater hack value. Cooler name, too. It's available at
<http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/project/ai-repository/ai/lang/lisp/impl/awk/0.html>
 
## Bugs

Eval doesn't check the syntax of expressions. This is a probably-misguided
attempt to bump up the speed a bit, that also simplifies some of the code.
The macroexpander in the startup file would be the best place to add
syntax- checking.

## Author

Darius Bacon <dairus@wry.me>

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 1994, 2001 by Darius Bacon.

Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any
purpose on any computer system, and to redistribute it freely,
subject to the following restrictions:

1. The author is not responsible for the consequences of use of
   this software, no matter how awful, even if they arise from defects
   in it.
2. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented, either
   by explicit claim or by omission.
3. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not
   be misrepresented as being the original software.

[1]: http://code.google.com/p/lawker/source/browse/fridge/lib/awk/awklisp/
[2]: http://github.com/darius/awklisp/blob/d00c4e5bc7f1ffffb0cc7cc939861ffe5df79990/Manual
