---
layout: default
title: "Awk + ANSI-C = OO"
tags: [dsl, awk, c, ansi c, oo, external_links]
---

# {{ page.title }}
 
## Description

ooc is an awk program which reads class descriptions and performs the
routine coding tasks necessary to do object-oriented coding in ANSI C.

The tool is exceptionally well documented in [Object oriented programming
with ANSI-C][1].

## Download

Download a 2002 copy of this code from [LAWKER][2].

Or go to the [author's web site][3].

## Description

ooc is a technique to do object\-oriented programming (classes, methods,
dynamic linkage, simple inheritance, polymorphisms, persistent objects,
method existence testing, message forwarding, exception handling,
etc.) using ANSI\-C.

ooc is a preprocessor to simplify the coding task by converting class
descriptions and method implementations into ANSI\-C as required by the
technique. You implement the algorithms inside the methods and the ooc
preprocessor produces the boilerplate.

ooc consists of a shell script driving a modular awk script (with
provisions for debugging), a set of reports \-\- code generation
templates \-\- interpreted by the script, and the source of a root class
to provide basic functionality.  Everything is designed to be changed
if desired. There are manual pages, lots of examples, among them a
calculator based on curses and X11, and you can ask me about the book.

ooc as a technique requires an ANSI\-C system \-\- classic C would
necessitate substantial changes. The preprocessor needs a healthy
Bourne\-Shell and "new" awk as described in Aho, Weinberger, and
Kernighan's book.

ooc was developed primarily to teach about object\-oriented programming
without having to learn a new language. If you see how it is done in a
familiar setting, it is much easier to grasp the concepts and to know
what miracles to expect from the technique and what not.  Conceivably,
the preprocessor can be used for production programming but this was not
the original intent. Being able to roll your own object\-oriented coding
techniques has its possibilities, however...

## Technical Details

Most sources should be viewed with tab stops set at 4 characters.

The original system ran on NeXTSTEP 3.2 and older, ESIX (System V) 4.0.4,
and Linux 0.99.pl4\-49. This rerelease was tested on MacOS X version
10.1.2 and Solaris version 5.8. You need to review paths in the script
'ooc/ooc' before running anything. Make sure the first line of this script
points to a Bourne\-style shell. Also make sure that the first line of
'09/munch' points to a (new) awk.

The rereleased 'ooc' awk\-programs have been tested with GNU awk versions
3.0.1 and 3.0.3. Previous versions did not support AWKPATH properly
(but this is not essential).

The makefiles could be smarter but they are naive enough for all systems.
This is a heterogeneous system \-\- set the environment variable
$OSTYPE to an architecture\-specific name. 'make' in the current
directory will create everything by calling 'make' in the various
subdirectories. Each 'makefile' includes 'make/Makefile.$OSTYPE', review
your 'make/Makefile.$OSTYPE' before you start.

The following make calls are supported throughout:

    make [all]	create examples
    make test	[make and] run examples
    make clean	remove all but sources
    make depend	make dependencies (if makefile.$OSTYPE supports it)

Make dependencies can be built with the -MM option of the GNU C compiler.
They are stored in a file 'depend' in each subdirectory.  They should
apply to all systems. 'makefile.$OSTYPE' may include a target 'depend'
to recreate 'depend' \-\- check 'makefile.darwin1.4' for an example.

## Contents

The following is a walk through the file hierarchy in the order of
the book:

makefile
: dispatch standard make calls to known directories

make/
: Makefile: boilerplate code for makefiles

01/\*
: chapter 1: abstract data types

	+ sets: Set demo
	+ bags: Bag demo: Set with reference count

02/\*
: chapter 2: dynamic linkage

	+ strings: String demo
	+ atoms: Atom demo: unique String

03/\*
: chapter 3: manipulating expressions with dyn. linkage

	+ postfix: postfix output of expression
	+ value: expression evaluation
	+ infix: infix output of expression

04/\*
: chapter 4: inheritance

	+ points: Point demo
	+ circles: Circle demo: Circle: Point with radius

05/\*
: chapter 5: symbol table with inheritance

	+ value: expression evaluation with vars, consts, functions

06/\*
: chapter 6: class hierarchy and meta classes

	+ any: objects that do not differ from any object

07/\*
: chapter 7: ooc preprocessor; use ooc -7

	+ points: Point demo: PointClass is a new metaclass
	+ circles: Circle demo: Circle is a new class
	+ queue: Queue demo: List is an abstract base class
	+ stack: Stack demo: another subclass of List

08/\*
: chapter 8: dynamic type checking; use ooc -8

	+ circles: Circle demo: nothing changed
	+ list:	List demo: traps insertion of numbers or strings

09/\*
: chapter 9: automatic initialization; use ooc -9

	+ munch: awk program to collect class list from nm -p output
	+ circles: Circle demo: no more init calls
	+ list:	List demo: no more init calls

10/\*
: chapter 10: respondsTo method; use ooc -10

	+ cmd: Filter demo: how flags and options are handled
	+ wc: word count filter
	+ sort: sorting filter, adds sort method to List

11/\*
: chapter 11: class methods

	+ value: expression evaluator, based on class hierarchy
	+ value: x memory reclamation enabled

12/\*
: chapter 12: persistent objects

	+ value: expression evaluator, with save and load

13/\*
: chapter 13: exception handling

	+ value: expression evaluator with exception handler
	+ except: Exception demo

14/\*
: chapter 14: message forwarding

	+ makefile.etc: (naive) generated rules for the library
	+ Xapp:	resources for X11-based programs
	+ hello: LineOut demo: hello, world
	+ button: Button demo
	+ run: terminal-oriented calculator
	+ cbutton: Crt demo: hello, world changes into a
	+ crun: curses-based caluclator
	+ xhello: XLineOut demo: hello, world
	+ xbutton: XButton demo with XawBox and XawForm
	+ xrun:	X11-based calculator with callbacks

man/\*
: manual pages

	+ \*.1:		tools
	+ \*.2:		functions
	+ \*.3:		some classes
	+ \*.4:		classes in chapter 14

ooc/\*
: ooc preprocessor

	+ ooc: command script; review 'home' 'OOCPATH' 'AWKPATH'
	+ awk/\*.awk: modules
	+ awk/\*.dbg: debugging modules
	+ rep/\*.rep: reports
	+ rep-\*/\*.rep: reports for early chapters

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 1993 

While you may use this software package, neither I nor my employers can
be made responsible for whatever problems you might cause or encounter.

While you may give away this package and/or software derived with it,
you should not charge for it, you should not claim that ooc is your work,
and I have published my own book about ooc before you did.

The same restrictions apply to whoever might get this package from you.

## Author

Axel T. Schreiner, <http://www.cs.rit.edu/~ats/>

[1]: http://lawker.googlecode.com/svn/fridge/lib/bash/ooc/contents/ASchreinerBook1993.pdf
[2]: http://lawker.googlecode.com/svn/fridge/lib/bash/ooc
[3]: https://ritdml.rit.edu/dspace/handle/1850/8544
