---
layout: default
title: The Awk 100
tags: [awk100, TODO]
---

The Awk 100
===========

Goals
-----

Awk is being used all around the world for real programming problems,
but the news is not getting out.

We are aiming to create a database of at least one hundred Awk programs
which will:

- Identify the tasks that Awk is really being used for
- Enable analysis of the benefits of the language for practical
  programming
- Serve as an information exchange for applications

Contribute
----------

If you, or your colleagues or friends have written a program which has
been used for purposes small or large, why not take five minutes to
record the facts, so that others can see what you've done?

To contribute, fill in this [template][template] and mail it to
[mail@awk.info][email] with the subject line _Awk 100 contribution_.

Current Listing
---------------

(Recent additions are shown first.)

24. A. Lahm and E. de Rinaldis' **(TODO: Change link)** [Patent
Matrix][link024]:

    - PatentMatrix is  an automated tool to survey patents related to
    large sets of genes or proteins.  The tool allows a rapid survey
    of patents associated with genes or proteins in a particular area
    of interest as defined by keywords. It can be efficiently used to
    evaluate the IP-related novelty of scientific findings and to rank
    genes or proteins according to their IP position.
23. P Janouch's **(TODO: Change link)** [AWK IRC agent][link023]:

    - VitaminA IRC bot is an experiment on what can be done with GNU
    AWK. It's a very simple though powerful scripting language. Using
    the coprocess feature, plugins can be implemented very easily and
    in a language-independent way as a side-effect.  The project runs
    only on Unix-derived systems.
22. Stephen Jungels' **(TODO: Change link)** [music player][link022]:

    - Plaiter (pronounced "player") is a command line front end
    to command line music players.  What does Plaiter do that (say)
    mpg123 can't already? It queues tracks, first of all. Secondly, it
    understands commands like play, plause, stop, next and prev. Finally,
    unlike most of the command line music players out there, Plaiter can
    handle a play list with more than one type of audio file, selecting
    the proper helper app to handle each type of file you throw at it.
21. Dan at sourceforge's **(TODO: Change link)** [Jawk][link021] system:

    - Awk, impelemeneted in the Java virtual machine. Very useful for
    extending lightweight scripting in Awk with (e.g.) network and GUI
    facilities from Java.
20. Axel T. Schreiner's **(TODO: Change link)** [OOC][link020] system:

    - ooc is an awk program which reads class descriptions and performs
    the routine coding tasks necessary to do object-oriented coding in
    ANSI C.
19. Ladd and Raming's **(TODO: Change link)** [Awk A-star][link019]
system:

    - Programmers often take awk "as is", never thinking to use it as
    a lab in which we can explore other language extensions. This is of
    course, only one way to treat the Awk code base.

    An alternate approach is to treat the Awk code base as a reusable
    library of parsers, regular expression engines, etc etc and to make
    modifications to the lanugage. This second approach was take by
    David Ladd and J. Christopher Raming in their A* system.
18. Henry Spencer's **(TODO: Change link)** [Amazing Awk Syntax
Language][link018] system:

    - Aaslg and aaslr implement the Amazing Awk Syntax Language,
    AASL (pro- nounced ``hassle''). Aaslg (pronounced ``hassling'')
    takes an AASL specification from the concatenation of the file(s)
    (default standard input) and emits the corresponding AASL table on
    standard output.
    - The AASL implementation is not large. The scanner is 78 lines
    of awk,the parser is 61 lines of AASL (using a fairly low-density
    paragraphing style and a good manycomments), and the semantics
    pass is 290 lines of awk. The table interpreter is 340 lines, about
    half of which (and most of the complexity) can be attributed to the
    automatic error recovery.
    - As an experiment with a more ambitious AASL specification, one
    for ANSI C was written. This occupies 374 lines excluding comments
    and blank lines, and with the exception of the messy details of C
    declarators is mostly a fairly straightforward transcription of the
    syntax given in the ANSI standard.
17. Jurgen Kahrs (and others) **(TODO: Change link)** [XMLgawk][link017]
system:

    - XMLgawk is an experimental extension of the GNU Awk interpreter. It
    includes a small XML parsing library which is built upon the Expat
    XML parser.
    - The same tool that can load the XML shared library can also add
    other libraries (e.g. PostgreSQL).
16. Henry Spencer's **(TODO: Change link)** [Amazing Awk
Assembler][link016]:

    - "aaa" (the Amazing Awk Assembler) is a primitive assembler written
    entirely in awk and sed.  It was done for fun, to establish whether
    it was possible.  It is; it works.  Using "aaa", it's very easy to
    adapt to a new machine, provided the machine falls into the generic
    "8-bit-micro" category.
15. Ronald  Loui's **(TODO: Change link)** [AI programming lab][link015]:

    - For many years, Ronald Loui has taugh AI using Awk. He writes:

	- Most people are surprised when I tell them what language
	we use in our undergraduate AI programming class. That's
	understandable. We use GAWK.
	- A repeated observation in this class is that only the scripting
	programmers can generate code fast enough to keep up with the
	demands of the class. Even though students were allowed to
	choose any language they wanted, and many had to unlearn the
	Java ways of doing things in order to benefit from scripting,
	there were few who could develop ideas into code effectively
	and rapidly without scripting.
	- What I have found not only surprising but also hopeful, is that
	when I have approached the AI people who still enjoy programming,
	some of them are not the least bit surprised.
14. Henry Spencer's **(TODO: Change link)** [Amazing Awk
Formatter][link014]:

    - Awf may not be lightning fast,  and it  has certain restrictions,
    but it does a decent job on most manual pages and simple -ms
    documents, and isn't subject to AT&T's brain-damaged licensing that
    denies many System V users any text formatter at all. It is also a
    text formatter that is simple enough to be tinkered with, for people
    who want to experiment.
13. Yung-Pin Cheng's **(TODO: Change link)** [Awk-Linux Course
ware][link013]:

    - The stable and cross-platform nature of Awk enabled the simple
    creation of a robust toolkit for teaching operating system concepts to
    university students.  The toolkit is much simpler/ easier to port to
    new platforms, than alternative and more elaborate course ware tools.
    - This work was the basis for a quite prestigious publication in the
    IEEE  Transactions on Education journal, 2008, Vol 51, Issue 4. Who
    said Awk was an old-fashioned tool?
12. Jon Bentley's **(TODO: Change link)** [m1 micro macro
processor][link012]:

    - Supports the essential operations of defining strings and replacing
    strings in text by their definitions.  All in 110 lines.  A little
    awk goes a long way.
11. Arnold Robbins and Nelson Beebe's classic **(TODO: Change link)**
[spell checker][link011]:

    - A powerful spell checker, and a case-study on how to best write
    applications using hundreds of lines of Awk.
10. Jim Hart's **(TODO: Change link)** [awk++][link010]:

    - An object-oriented Awk.
09. Wolfgan Zekol's **(TODO: Change link)** [Yawk][link009]:

    - WIKI written in Awk
08. Darius Bacon's [AwkLisp][link008]:

    - LISP written in Awk
07. Bill Poser - **(TODO: Change link)** [Name][link007]:

    - Generate TeX code for a bilingual dictionary.
06. Ronald Loui - **(TODO: Change link)** [Faster clustering][link006]:

    - Demonstration to DoD of a clustering algorithm suitable for
    streaming data
05. Peter Krumin - **(TODO: Change link)** [Get YouTube videos][link005]:

    - Download YouTube videos
04. Jim Hart - **(TODO: Change link)** [Sudoku][link004]:

    - Solve sudoku puzzles using the same strategies as a person would,
    not by brute force.
03. Ronald Loui - **(TODO: Change link)** [Anne's Negotiation
Game][link003]:

    - Research on a model of negotiation incorporating search, dialogue,
    and changing expectations.
02. Ronald Loui - **(TODO: Change link)** [Baseball Sim][link002]:

    - A baseball simulator for investigating the efficiency of batting
    lineups.
01. Ronald Loui - **(TODO: Change link)** [Argcol][link001]:

    - A tool inspired by fmt that could be used while working in vi to
    maintain a multi-column pro-con argument format.

[template]: http://lawker.googlecode.com/svn/fridge/doc/awk100/template.txt
[email]: mailto:mail@awk.info?subject=Awk 100 contribution
[link024]: http://awk.info/?awk100/patentMatrix
[link023]: http://awk.info/?awk100/023vitamina
[link022]: http://awk.info/?tools/plait
[link021]: http://awk.info/?jawk
[link020]: http://awk.info/?dsl/ooc
[link019]: http://awk.info/?awkastar
[link018]: http://awk.info/?aasl
[link017]: http://awk.info/?awk100/017xmlgawk
[link016]: http://awk.info/?awk100/aaa
[link015]: ?awk100/015soccer
[link014]: ?tools/awf
[link013]: ?awk100/013awklinux
[link012]: ?tools/m1
[link011]: ?awk100/spell
[link010]: ?awk100/010awkplusplus
[link009]: ?awk100/009yawk
[link008]: ?awk100/008awklisp
[link007]: ?awk100/007name
[link006]: ?awk100/006boris
[link005]: ?awk100/005getYouTube
[link004]: ?awk100/004sudoku
[link003]: ?awk100/003negotiate
[link002]: ?awk100/002baseballsim
[link001]: ?awk100/001argcol
