---
layout: default
title: 'Sorting in Awk'
tags: [ productive, working_example, sorting, TODO, tutorial, posix ]
---

## Sorting in Awk

**NOTE**: Modern awk implementations have built-in `sort` and `asort` functions. This page is for educational purposes.

#### Synopsis

    awk -f sorting.awk < INPUT

#### Description

Below is a script I wrote to demonstrate how to use arrays, functions,
numerical vs string comparison, etc.

It also provides a framework for people to implement sorting algorithms
for comparison. I've implemented a couple and I'm hoping others will
contribute more in the same style.

I put very few comments in deliberately because I
think the only parts that are hard to understand given some small
amount of reading awk manuals are the actual sorting algorithms,
and those should be well documented already given a reference except
my made-up *Key Sort* but I think that's very easy to understand.


#### Examples

    # `sort -R` will randomize the numbers, AWK will sort them back.
    $ seq 1 5 | sort -R | awk -f sorting.awk
    1
    2
    3
    4
    5

    # Sort default to string/alphanumeric sort
    $ seq 7 12 | sort -R | awk -f sorting.awk
    10
    11
    12
    7
    8
    9

    # Add `sortType=n` to sort numerically
    $ seq 7 12 | sort -R | awk -f sorting.awk -v sortType=n
    7
    8
    9
    10
    11
    12

    # Set `sortAlg=sel` to use the alternative sorting algorithm
    $ seq 1 5 | sort -R | awk -f sorting.awk -v sortAlg=sel
    1
    2
    3
    4
    5

#### Code Details

The `selSort` function implements
[Selection Sort](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selection_sort).

The `keySort` function implements key sorting **TODO: elaborate?**.

The `genSort` function demonstrates the use of arrays, functions, and string
vs numeric comparisons in awk. It also provides a framework for people to
implement various [sorting algorithms](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorting_algorithm)

`genSort` traverses the input array, storing it's indices in the output array
in sorted order of the input array elements. e.g.:
{% highlight awk %}
     in:  inArr["foo"]="b"; inArr["bar"]="a"; inArr["xyz"]="b"
          outArr[] is empty

     out: inArr["foo"]="b"; inArr["bar"]="a"; inArr["xyz"]="b"
          outArr[1]="bar"; outArr[2]="foo"; outArr[3]="xyz"
{% endhighlight %}
It can sort on specific fields given a field number and field separator.

sortType of "n" means sort by numerical comparison, sort by string comparison otherwise.

#### Download

[sorting.awk]({{site.baseurl}}/lib/awk/sorting.awk)


#### Code

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/sorting.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}


#### Author

Ed Morton
