---
layout: default
title: 'Why Gawk?'
tags: [ tutorial, anecdotal, TODO ]
---

## {{ page.title }}

by T. Menzies


**The Enlightened Ones say that....**

- You should never use C if you can do it with a script;
-  You should never use a script if you can do it with awk;
-   Never use awk if you can do it with sed;
-     Never use sed if you can do it with grep.

Awk is a good old-fashioned UNIX filtering tool invented in the 1970s.
The language is simple and Awk programs are generally very short.
Awk is useful when the overheads of more sophisticated approaches is
not worth the bother. Also, the cost of
(**TODO: fix link**) [Learning Awk](http://awk.info/?teachingawk)
is very low.

**But aren't there better scripting languages?**

Faster? Well,
[maybe yes](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~sedwards/classes/2002/w4115/scripting.9up.pdf)
and
[maybe no](http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/who/bwk/interps/pap.html)

**And Awk is old (mid-70s). Aren't modern languages more productive?**

Well again, maybe yes and maybe no. One measure of the productivity of a
language is how lines of code are required to code up one business level
*function point*.
Compared to many popular languages, GAWK scores very highly:

    loc/fp   language
    ------   --------
    
        6,   excel 5
       13,   sql
       21,   awk   <========
       21,   perl
       21,   eiffel
       21,   clos
       21,   smalltalk
       29,   delphi
       29,   visual basic 5
       49,   ada 95
       49,   ai shells
       53,   c++
       53,   java
       64,   lisp
       71,   ada 83
       71,   fortran 95
       80,   3rd generation default
       91,   ansi cobol 85
       91,   pascal
      107,   2nd generation default
      107,   algol 68
      107,   cobol
      107,   fortran
      128,   c
      320,   1st generation default
      640,   machine language
     3200,   natural language

Anyway, there are other considerations. Awk is real succinct, simple
enough to teach, and easy enough to recode in C (if you want raw speed).
For example,  here's the complete listing of someone's Awk
spell-checking program:

{% highlight awk %}
BEGIN { while ( getline<"/usr/dict/words") dict[$0]=1 }
!dict[$1] { print $1 }
{% endhighlight %}

Sure, there's about a gazillion enhancements you'd like to make on this
one but you gotta say, this is real succinct.

Awk is the cure for late execution of software syndrome (a.k.a. *LESS*).
The symptoms of LESS are a huge time delay before a new idea is executable.
Awk programmers can hack up usable systems in the time it takes other
programmers to boot their IDE.

And, as a result of that  easy exploration, it is possible to find loopholes
missed by other analyst that lead to the innovative better solution to the
problems (e.g. see Ronald Loui's O(nlogn)
(**TODO: update link**) [clustering tool](http://awk.info/?awk100/006boris)

Certainly, we can drool over the language features offered by more advanced
languages like pointers, generic iterators, continuations, etc etc. And
Awk's lack of data structures (except num, string, and array) requires
some discipline to handle properly.

But experienced Awk programmers know that the cleverer the program, the
smaller the audience gets. If it is possible for to explain something
succinctly in a simple language like Awk, then it is also possible that
more folks will read that code.

Finally, at this may be the most important point, it might be misguided to
argue about Awk vs LanguageX in terms of the specifics of those languages.
Awk programmers can't over-elaborate their solutions- they are forced to
code the solution in the simplest manner possible. This push to simplicity,
to the essence of the problem, can be an insightful process.
Coding in Awk is like preserving fruit- you boil off everything that is
superfluous,  that needlessly bloats the material what you are working with.

It is amazing how little code is required to code the core of an idea
(e.g. see Darius Bacon's (**TODO: update link**) [LISP interpreter](http://awk.info/?dsl/awklisp)
 written in Awk).
