---
layout: default
title: "An Awk Dungeon Adventure Game"
tags: [ auto_converted, working_example, posix ]
---

## {{ page.title }}


## Synopsis

    awk -f game.awk

## Comments

This is one of the longest awk programs that I have written.  Notice that it is
function-driven.  I have created functions to give the introduction, and the
inventory, and I have created functions for each room. 
The awk program is kicked off by the BEGIN section, which runs intro() and cave() 
to put you in the first room.
Each object is represented by a variable of the same name (i.e. sword for
sword) and is either 0 (off) or 1 (on), depending if you have the object. 
Each function will print descriptions and gve options, depending on the setting
of these boolean variables.

## About

I wrote a small text-adventure game in awk - just to stretch the perception of
awk, and show that it can be used as a programming language.
This game is small, but gives a taste of the fantasy adventure games of the
80's - like Zork from Infocom.
In this adventure, you are in a cave complex, and need to find the hidden gold
to win.  The adventure lets you move around, search, pick up objects, and use
them.  It uses a menu - not free-form entries.
Here is the awk code:


## Download

[game.awk]({{ site.baseurl }}/lib/awk/game.awk)


## Code

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/game.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}


## Author

Praveen Puri has been a programmer and full-time trader. He is the author
of [Stock](http://www.amazon.com/Stock-Trading-Riches-Powerful-Transforms/dp/1434809870)
which teaches his stock trading system.

