---
layout: default
title: 'Quicksort 2'
tags: [ productive, tutorial, posix, working_example, sorting, TODO ]
---

## quicksort-2

#### Synopsis

    gawk -f quicksort2.awk < INPUT-FILE

#### Description

Quicksort divides the input data around a randomly selected pivot, then
recurses on the divided data.

In quicksort2, the pivot is selected fromthe first line of input.
Each data division is handled by a different UNIX pipe and recursive
gawk processes are called on the divided data.

Yes, this is not the fastest way to do it but (in theory anyway) it
should be able to handle very big data sets.

#### Example

    # `sort -R` will randomize the numbers, AWK will sort them back.
    $ seq 1 5 | sort -R | awk -f quicksort2.awk
    1
    2
    3
    4
    5

#### Download

[quicksort2.awk]({{site.baseurl}}/lib/awk/quicksort2.awk)

#### Code

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/quicksort2.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

#### Bugs

The output ignores repeated input values. I thought it was a problem with
repeating the name of the pipes (hence the "rand()" labelling) but that did
not fix the issues.

#### Copyright

    Copyright (c) 2009 by David Long.
    Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
    a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
    "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
    without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
    distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
    permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
    the following conditions:
    
    The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
    included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
    
    THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
    EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
    IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
    CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
    TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
    SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

#### Author

Original version: David Long, 2004.

Tim Menzies added some modifications in 2009 to call recursive Gawk pipes
on both sides of the pivot.
