---
layout: default
title: Eliza
tags: [fun, working_example,posix]
---

## Eliza

### Contents

Synopsis
Download
Description
Example dialogue
Code
Set up
ElizaSays
SetUpEliza
Author

### Synopsis

    gawk -f eliza.awk

### Download

[eliza.awk]({{ site.baseurl }}/lib/awk/eliza.awk)


### Description

From [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ELIZA):
> ELIZA was a computer program and an early example of (by modern standards) primitive natural language processing. ELIZA operated by processing users' responses to scripts, the most famous of which was DOCTOR, a simulation of a Rogerian psychotherapist. In this mode, ELIZA mostly rephrased the user's statements as questions and posed those to the 'patient.' ELIZA was written by Joseph Weizenbaum between 1964 to 1966.

### Example dialogue

    This is a Gawk implementation of the famous ELIZA program by Joseph Weizenbaum.
    To end, type SHUT UP
     
    HI, IM ELIZA, TELL ME YOUR PROBLEM
    I hate dogs
    CAN YOU ELABORATE ON THAT ?
    Dogs remind me of Mylie Cyrus
    CAN YOU ELABORATE ON THAT ?
    You're kidding, right? Mylie Cyrus is one of the biggest stars on the planet
    WHAT MAKES YOU THINK I AM KIDDING, RIGHT? MYLIE CYRUS IS ONE OF THE BIGGEST STARS ON THE PLANET ?
    Cause you did not know about Mylie
    WE WERE DISCUSSING YOU -- NOT ME
    No,  I was discussing Mylie
    Oh, I ID NOT KNOW ABOUT MYLIE
    Well aren't you stupid
    Oh, I TUPID
    can you get her number?
    WE WERE DISCUSSING YOU -- NOT ME
    sorry
    PLEASE DON'T APOLOGIZE !
    but you sound so angry
    YOU'RE NOT REALLY TALKING ABOUT ME, ARE YOU ?
    i think you are  a robot
    Oh, I RE  A ROBOT
    yes
    I UNDERSTAND
    no you don't
    YOU'RE NOT REALLY TALKING ABOUT ME, ARE YOU ?
    hey- is this eliza?
    WHAT'S ABOUT ME ?
    I want to take you to dinner
    YOU'RE NOT REALLY TALKING ABOUT ME, ARE YOU ?
    I feel you are really stupid
    WE WERE DISCUSSING YOU -- NOT ME
    SHUT UP
    WELL, PLEASE PAY YOUR BILL. ITS EXACTLY ... $101

### Code

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/eliza.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}


### Author

Juergen Kahrs
