---
layout: default
title: "New release: Runawk 0.16"
tags: [runawk, external_links, TODO]
---

New release: Runawk 0.16
========================

_In [comp.lang.awk][link01], **Aleksey Cheusov** writes:_

I've made runawk-0.16.0 release. This release has lots of important
improvements and additions.  Sources are available from

+ [sourceforge][link02]
+ [freshmeat][link03]
+ [LAWKER][link04]

What is runawk?
---------------

RUNAWK is a small wrapper for AWK interpreter that helps to write the
standalone programs in AWK. It provides MODULES for AWK similar to PERL's
"use" command and other powerful features. Dozens of ready to use modules
are also provided.

(For more information, see [details from the last release][link05].)

Major changes in this release
-----------------------------

Lots of demo programs for most runawk modules were created and they are
in examples/ subdirectory now.

New MEGA module ;-) power_getopt.awk  
See the documentation and demo program examples/demo_power_getopt.
It makes options handling REALLY easy (see below).

New modules:

+ embed_str.awk
+ has_suffix.awk
+ has_prefix.awk
+ readfile.awk
+ modinfo.awk

Minor fixes and improvements in dirname.awk and basename.awk.  Now they
are fully compatible with dirname(1) and basename(1)

RUNAWK sets the following environment variables for the child awk
subprocess:

+ RUNAWK_MODC - A number of modules (-f filename) passed to AWK
+ RUNAWK_MODV_&lt;n&gt; - Full path to the module #n, where n is in
\[0..RUNAWK_MODC) range.

RUNAWK sets RUNAWK_ART_STDIN environment variable for the child awk
subprocess to 1 if additional/artificial \`-' was added to the list to
awk's arguments.

Makefile:

+ bmake-ism were removed. Now Makefile is fully compatible with FreeBSD
make.
+ CLEANFILES target is used instead of hand-made rules
+ Minor fix in 'test_all' target

Power_GetOpt.awk
----------------

The most powerful feature of this release is power_getopt.awk module.
It provides a very powerful and very easy way to handle options.
Everything is in the usage message, you should do anything at all.
I think example below is easy.

### Example Code ([download]({{site.baseurl}}/lib/awk/runawk016_1.awk))

	% cat 1.awk
{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/runawk016_1.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### ./1.awk

	% ./1.awk
	f         --- 0
	flag      --- 0
	long-flag --- 0
	s         --- 0
	F         --- default1
	FLAG      --- default2

### ./1.awk -h

	% ./1.awk -h
	power_getopt - program demonstrating a power of power_getopt.awk module
	usage: power_getopt [OPTIONS]
	OPTIONS:
	   -h|--help                  display this screen
	   -f|--flag                  flag
	      --long-flag             long flag only
	   -s                         short flag only
	   -F|--FLAG <value>          flag with value

### ./1.awk -f

	% ./1.awk -f
	f         --- 1
	flag      --- 1
	long-flag --- 0
	s         --- 0
	F         --- default1
	FLAG      --- default2

### ./1.awk -F value

	% ./1.awk -F value
	f         --- 0
	flag      --- 0
	long-flag --- 0
	s         --- 0
	F         --- value
	FLAG      --- value

### ./1.awk --FLAG=value

	% ./1.awk --FLAG=value
	f         --- 0
	flag      --- 0
	long-flag --- 0
	s         --- 0
	F         --- value
	FLAG      --- value

[link01]: http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.awk/browse_thread/thread/93548c6764c469af#
[link02]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/runawk
[link03]: http://freshmeat.net/projects/runawk
[link04]: http://code.google.com/p/lawker/source/browse/fridge/c/runawk/
[link05]: http://awk.info/?tools/runawk
