---
layout: default
title: Runawk 0.18 Released
tags: [runawk, external_links, news]
permalink: /news/runawk018.html
---

Runawk 0.18 Released
====================

Download
--------

<http://sourceforge.net/projects/runawk>

About
-----

runawk is a small wrapper for the AWK interpreter that helps one write
standalone AWK scripts. Its main feature is to provide a module/library
system for AWK which is somewhat similar to Perl's "use" command. It
also allows you to select a preferred AWK interpreter and to setup the
environment for your scripts. It also provides other helpful features,
for example it includes numerous useful of modules.

Major Changes IN RUNAWK-0.18.0
------------------------------

 Makefile:

+ "install-dirs" target has been renamed to "installdirs" 
+ At compile time MODULESDIR can contain a *list* of colon-separated
  directories, e.g. /usr/local/share/runawk:/usr/local/share/awk
+ Support for multiply applied options, e.g. -vvv for increasing verbosity
  level. If option without arguments is multiply applied, getarg()
  function returns a number of times it was applied, not just 0 or 1.

New modules:

+ init_getopt.awk using alt_getopt.awk and used by power_getopt.awk.
  Its goal is to initialize \`long_opts' and \`long_opts' variables but
  not run \`getopt' function.
+ heapsort.awk  :  heapsort :-)
+ quicksort.awk : quicksort :-)
+ sort.awk      : either heapsort or quicksort, the default is heapsort.
  Unfortunately GAWK's asort() and asorti() functions do *not* satisfy
  my needs. Another (and more important) reason is a portability.

Improvements, clean-ups and fixes in regression tests.

Also, runawk-0-18-0 was successfully tested on the following platforms:
NetBSD-5.0/x86, NetBSD-2.0/alpha, OpenBSD-4.5/x86, FreeBSD-7.1/x86,
FreeBSD-7.1/spark, Linux/x86 and Darwin/ppc.

Author
------

Aleksey Cheusov 
