---
layout: default
title: "New release: RUNAWK 0.17"
tags: [runawk, external_links, TODO]
---

New release: RUNAWK 0.17
========================

What is RUNAWK?
---------------

RUNAWK is a small wrapper for the AWK interpreter that helps one write
standalone AWK scripts. Its main feature is to provide a module/library
system for AWK which is somewhat similar to Perl's "use" command. It
also allows you to select a preferred AWK interpreter and to setup the
environment for your scripts. RUNAWK makes programming AWK easy and
efficient. RUNAWK also provides many useful AWK modules.

Sources
-------

+ [LAWKER][link01]
+ [http://freshmeat.net/projects/runawk/][link02]
+ [http://sourceforge.net/projects/runawk/][link03]
+ [http://mova.org/~cheusov/pub/runawk/][link04]

Major Changes
-------------

Version 0.17.0, by Aleksey Cheusov, Sat, 12 Sep 2009

runawk:

+ ADDED: new option for runawk for #use'ing modules: -f.  runawk can
  also be used for oneliners! ;-)
	{% highlight awk %}
	runawk -f abs.awk -e 'BEGIN {print abs(-123); exit}'
	{% endhighlight %}
+ In a multilined code passed to runawk using option -e, spaces are
  allowed before #directives.
+ After inventing alt_getopt.awk module there is no reason for heuristics
  that detects whether to add \`-' to AWK arguments or not. So I've
  removed this heuristics. Use alt_getopt.awk module or other "smart"
  module for handling options correctly!

alt_getopt.awk and power_getopt.awk:

+ FIX: for "abc:" short options specifier BSD and GNU getopt(3) accept
  "-acb" and understand it as "-a -cb", they also accept "-ac b" and also
  translate it to "-a -cb". Now alt_getopt.awk and power_getopt.awk work
  the same way.

power_getopt.awk:

+ -h option doesn't print usage information, --help (and its short
  synonym) does.

New modules:

+ shquote.awk, implementing shquote() function.  
  *shquote(str):*

	+ \`shquote' transforms the string \`str' by adding shell escape
	   and quoting characters to include it to the system() and
	   popen() functions as an argument, so that the arguments will
	   have the correct values after being evaluated by the shell.

  Inspired by NetBSD's shquote(3) from libc.

 + runcmd.awk, implementing functions runcmd1() and xruncmd1()  
   *runcmd1(CMD, OPTS, FILE):*

	+ wrapper for function system() that runs a command CMD with
	  options OPTS and one filename FILE.  Unlike system(CMD " " OPTS
	  " " FILE) the function runcmd1() handles correctly FILE and
	  CMD containing spaces, single quote, double quote, tilde etc.

+ *xruncmd1(FILE):*

	+ safe wrapper for 'runcmd(1)'.  awk exits with error if running
	  command failed.

+ isnum.awk, implementing trivial isnum() function, see the source code.
+ alt_join.awk, implementing the following functions:  
  *join_keys(HASH, SEP):*

	+ returns string consisting of all keys from HASH separated
	by SEP.

  *join_values(HASH, SEP):*

	+ returns string consisting of all values from HASH separated
	by SEP.

  *join_by_numkeys (ARRAY, SEP \[, START \[, END\]\]):*

	+ returns string consisting of all values from ARRAY separated by
	  SEP. Indices from START (default: 1) to END (default: \+inf) are
	  analysed. Collecting values is stopped on index absent in ARRAY.

[link01]: http://code.google.com/p/lawker/source/browse/fridge/c/runawk/
[link02]: http://freshmeat.net/projects/runawk/
[link03]: http://sourceforge.net/projects/runawk/
[link04]: http://mova.org/~cheusov/pub/runawk/
