---
layout: default
title: "Super-For Loops"
tags: [tip, super-for, external_links]
permalink: /tip/superFor.html
---

# {{ page.title }}

*In this [exchange from comp.lang.awk][1], Jason Quinn discusses his
super-for loop trick. Arnold Robbins then chimes in to say that, with
indirect functions, super-for loops could become a generic tool.*

Jason Quinn writes:

+ Frequently when programming, situations arise for me where I need a
  nested number of for-loops. Such  case arose for me again just recently
  while I was inventing a dice game. Anyway, here is the implementation
  that I ended up using to create a "super-for" loop in AWK (a little
  trickier than C).
+ This simple example merely lists all possible outcomes of rolling 4,
  6, 8, 10, 12, and 20 sided dice at once. A super-for loop requires
  an array to specify the loop indices... here we have 6 dice and the
  number of sides determines the indices. The code is easily modified
  for an arbitrary number of dice (which is the whole point).
+ I identify three parts of a super-for which I called the
  **prologue**, **body**, and **epilog**. Under most circumstances,
  I think the main body only would get used.
+ For example:
{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/superFor_example_01.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

Arnold Robbins replies:

+ I think this would make a great application for indirect function calls.
  For example:
{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/superFor_example_02.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

[1]: http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.awk/browse_thread/thread/71accc0576ce615e#
