---
layout: default
title: "Random Numbers in Gawk"
tags: [tip, gawk, random, external_links]
permalink: /tip/random.html
---

# {{ page.title }}

*(Summarized and extended from a [recent discussion at comp.lang.awk][1].)*

## Background

A standard idiom in Gawk is to reset the random number generator in a
`BEGIN` block.
{% highlight awk %}
BEGIN {srand() }
{% endhighlight %}

Sadly,  when called with no arguments, this "reseeding" uses
time-in-seconds. So if the same "random" task runs multiple times in
the same second, it will get the same random number seed.

## Houston, We Have a  Problem

**"Ben" writes:**

I have a Gawk script that puts random comments into a file. It is run
3 times in a row in quick succession. I found that seeding the random
number generator using gawk did not work because all 3 times it was run
was done within the same second (and it uses the time).

I was wondering if anyone could give me some suggestions as to what can
be done to get around this problem.

## Solution \#1: Persistent Memory
		
**Kenny McCormack  writes:**

When last I ran into this problem, what I did was to save the last value
returned by `rand()` to a file, then on the next run, read that in and
use that value as the arg to `srand()`. Worked well.

*(Editor's comment: Kenny's solution does work well but incurs the cost
of maintaining and reading/writing that "last value" file.)*

## Solution \#2: Use Bash

**Tim Menzies writes:**

How about setting the seed using the BASH $RANDOM variable:
{% highlight awk %}
gawk -v Seed=$RANDOM --source 'BEGIN { srand(Seed ? Seed : 1) }' 
{% endhighlight %}

If referenced multiple times in a second, it always generates a different
number.

In the above usage, if we have a seed, use it. Else, no seed so start all
"random"  at the same place. If you prefer to use the default "seed from
time-in-seconds" then use:
{% highlight awk %}
BEGIN { if (Seed) { srand(Seed) } else { srand() } }
{% endhighlight %}

*(Editor's comment: Tim's solution incurs the overhead of additional
command-line syntax. However, it does allow the process calling Gawk to
control the seed. This is important when trying to, say, debug code by
recreating the sequence of random numbers that lead to the bug.)*

## Solution \#3: Query the OS

**Thomas Weidenfeller writes:**

Is that good enough (random enough) for your task?
{% highlight awk %}
BEGIN {
        "od -tu4 -N4 -A n /dev/random" | getline
        srand(0+$0)
}
{% endhighlight %}

*(Editor's comment: Nice. Thomas' solution reminds us that "Gawk" can access a whole host of operating system facilities.)*

## Solution \#4: Use the Process Id

**Aharon Robbins writes:**

You could so something like add PROCINFO\["pid"\] to the value of the time,
or use that as the seed.
{% highlight sh %}
$ gawk 'BEGIN { srand(systime() + PROCINFO["pid"]); print rand() }'
0.405889
$ gawk 'BEGIN { srand(systime() + PROCINFO["pid"]); print rand() }'
0.671906
{% endhighlight %}

*(Editor's comment: Aharon's solution is the fastest of all the ones
shown here. For example, on Mac OS/X, his solution takes 6ms to run:*
{% highlight sh %}
$ time gawk 'BEGIN { srand(systime() + PROCINFO["pid"]) }'

real    0m0.006s
user    0m0.002s
sys     0m0.004s
{% endhighlight %}

*while Thomas' solution is somewhat  slower:*
{% highlight sh %}
$ time gawk 'BEGIN { "od -tu4 -N4 -A n /dev/random" | getline; srand($0+0) }'

real    0m0.039s
user    0m0.004s
sys     0m0.034s
{% endhighlight %}

*Note that while Aharon's solution is the fastest, it does not let
some master process set the seed for the Gawk process (e.g. as in Tim's
approach).)*

## Conclusion

If you want raw speed, use Aharon's approach. 

If you want seed control, see Tim's approach.

[1]: http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.awk/browse_thread/thread/a5af2e65bd179961#
