---
layout: default
title: 'spell.awk'
tags: [awk100, spell, external_links, TODO]
---

# {{ page.title }}

## Contents

+ [Synopsis](#01)
+ [Download](#02)
+ [Description](#03)
	* [Why Study This Code?](#03.01)
	* [Dictionaries](#03.02)
	* [Suffixes](#03.03)
	* [Output](#03.04)
+ [Code](#04)
	* [Top-Level](#04.01)
	* [get_dictionaries](#04.02)
	* [Initialize](#04.03)
	* [load_dictionaries](#04.04)
	* [load_suffixes](#04.05)
	* [order_suffixes](#04.06)
	* [report_exceptions](#04.07)
	* [scan_options](#04.08)
	* [spell_check_line](#04.09)
	* [spell_check_word](#04.10)
	* [strip_suffixes](#04.11)
	* [swap](#04.12)
* [Author](#05)

## Synopsis ## {#01}

{% highlight sh %}
awk [-v Dictionaries="sysdict1 sysdict2 ..."] -f spell.awk -- \
    [=suffixfile1 =suffixfile2 ...] [*dict1 *dict2 ...] \
    [-strip] [-verbose] [file(s)]
{% endhighlight %}

## Download ## {#02}

Download from [LAWKER][1].

## Description ## {#03}

### Why Study This Code? ### {#03.01}

This program is an example par excellence of the power of awk. Yes, if
written in "C", it would run faster. But goodness me, it would be much
longer to code.  These few lines implement a powerful spell checker, with
user-specifiable exception lists. The built-in dictionary is constructed
from a list of standard Unix spelling dictionaries, overridable on the
command line.

It also offers some tips on how to structure larger-than-ten-line awk programs.
In the code below, note the:

+ The code is hundreds of lines long. Yes folks, its true, Awk is not just a
  tool for writing one-liners.
+ The code is well-structured. Note, for example, how the BEGIN block is used
  to initialize the system from files/functions.
+ The code uses two tricks that encourages function reuse:
    * Much of the functionality has been moved out of PATTERN-ACTION and into
      functions.
    * The number of globals is restricted: note the frequent use of local
      variables in functions.
+ There is an example, in scan_options, of how parse command line arguments;
+ The use of "print pipes" in in report_expcetions shows how to link Awk code
  to other commands.

(And to write even larger programs, divided into many files, see
**(TODO: Change link)** [runawk][2].)

### Dictionaries ### {#03.02}

Dictionaries are simple text files, with one word per line. Unlike those
for Unix spell(1), the dictionaries need not be sorted, and there is no
dependence on the locale in this program that can affect which exceptions
are reported, although the locale can affect their reported order in
the exception list. A default list of dictionaries can be supplied via
the environment variable DICTIONARIES, but that can be overridden on
the command line.

For the purposes of this program, words are located by replacing ASCII
control characters, digits, and punctuation (except apostrophe) with
ASCII space (32).  What remains are the words to be matched against
the dictionary lists. Thus, files in ASCII and ISO-8859-n encodings are
supported, as well as Unicode files in UTF-8 encoding.

All word matching is case insensitive (subject to the workings of tolower()).

In this simple version, which is intended to support multiple languages, no
attempt is made to strip word suffixes, unless the +strip option is supplied.

### Suffixes ### {#03.03}

Suffixes are defined as regular expressions, and may be supplied from
suffix files (one per name) named on the command line, or from an internal
default set of English suffixes. Comments in the suffix file run from
sharp (#) to end of line. Each suffix regular expression should end with
$, to anchor the expression to the end of the word. Each suffix expression
may be followed by a list of one or more strings that can replace it, with
the special convention that "" represents an empty string. For example:

        ies$    ie ies y        # flies -> fly, series -> series, ties -> tie
        ily$    y ily           # happily -> happy, wily -> wily
        nnily$  n               # funnily -> fun

Although it is permissible to include the suffix in the replacement
list, it is not necessary to do so, since words are looked up before
suffix stripping.

Suffixes are tested in order of decreasing length, so that the longest
matches are tried first.

### Output ### {#03.04}

The default output is just a sorted list of unique spelling exceptions,
one per line. With the +verbose option, output lines instead take the form

        filename:linenumber:exception

Some Unix text editors recognize such lines, and can use them to move
quickly to the indicated location.

## Code ## {#04}

### Top-Level ### {#04.01}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_top_level.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### get_dictionaries ### {#04.02}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_get_dictionaries.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Initialize ### {#04.03}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_initialize.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### load_dictionaries ### {#04.04}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_load_dictionaries.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### load_suffixes ### {#04.05}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_load_suffixes.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### order_suffixes ### {#04.06}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_order_suffixes.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### report_exceptions ### {#04.07}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_report_exceptions.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### scan_options ### {#04.08}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_scan_options.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### spell_check_line ### {#04.09}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_spell_check_line.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### spell_check_word ### {#04.10}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_spell_check_word.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### strip_suffixes ### {#04.11}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_strip_suffixes.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

### swap ### {#04.12}

{% highlight awk %}
{% insert_example lib/awk/spell_swap.awk %}
{% endhighlight %}

## Author ## {#05}

Arnold Robbins and Nelson H.F. Beebe in "Classic Shell Scripting",
O'Reilly Books

[1]: http://lawker.googlecode.com/svn/fridge/lib/awk/spell.awk
[2]: http://awk.info/?tools/runawk
