---
layout: default
title: Name
tags: [awk100, gawk, external_links]
---

# Name

Not a single program.

## Purpose

Generate TeX code for a bilingual dictionary from a flat file database.
This system has been used to generate multiple editions of dictionaries
for several dialects of Carrier, the endangered language of a large
portion of the central interior of British Columbia.

## Developers

Bill Poser

## Organization

## Country

Canada

## Domain

linguistics - dictionary publishing

## Contact

Bill Poser

## Email

<billposer@alum.mit.edu>

## Description
 
A dictionary database consists of four flat files containing records in
which fields are identified by tags, in a format isomorphic to Standard
Dictionary Format.  The four files contain: main entries, example
sentences with translations, verb roots, verb stems. This provides modest
degree of relativization. Awk scripts controlled by a makefile do the bulk
of the work of generating TeX code for printing dictionaries containing
front matter, a Carrier-English section, an English-Carrier section,
a topical index, an alphabetical root list, a list of roots sorted by
English gloss, an alphabetical list of verb stems, a list of verb stems
sorted by root, an alphabetical list of affixes, a list of affixes sorted
by English gloss, a list of scientific names , a list of placenames,
and credits for illustrations.

## Awk

gawk

## Shell

The awk scripts are executed from a make file.

## Platform

GNU/Linux on x86.

## Uses

The awk scripts are executed from a makefile by GNU make. The other
program used extensively is the sort utility [msort][1].

## Lines

5500

## DevelopmentEffort

The first usable version took no more than a day (plus the time to create
the TeX template into which the generated code is inserted).

## MaintenanceEffort

Pure maintenance due to changes in environment, bit rot, etc. has been
just about nil. The effort devoted to adding features very difficult
to estimate as it has taken place at irregular intervals over a period
of 15 years.

## Current

Status 1=Prototype, 2=Evaluation, 3=Released, 4=No longer supported,
5=Dead

3, I guess. The code is mature but not really released since the author
is the only one who normally uses it.

## Use

1=Personal use, 2=in-House use, 3=Free/public domain, 4=Licensed, 5=Sold product

1

## Users

1

## DateDeployed

June 1993.

## References

A paper describing these databases and the process for generating
dictionaries from them is available: [Lexical Databases for Carrier][2]

## Url

Some information about the resulting dictionaries:
<http://www.ydli.org/products/dicts.htm>

[1]: http://billposer.org/Software/msort.html
[2]: http://www.billposer.org/Papers/carlexdb.pdf
