---
layout: default
title: Awk-Linux
tags: [awk100, external_links, dead_links, TODO]
permalink: /awk100/013awklinux.html
---

# Awk-Linux

Awk-Linux Educational Operating Systems

## Purpose

Teaching operating systems.

## Developers

Yung-Pin Cheng 

## Email

<ypc@csie.ntnu.edu.tw>


## Organization

Software Engineering Lab.  
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering  
National Taiwan Normal University

## Country
 
TAIWAN

## Domain

Educators of Operating Systems   

## Description

Most well-known instructional operating systems are complex, particularly
if their companion software is taken into account. It takes considerable
time and effort to craft these systems, and their complexity may
introduce maintenance and evolution problems. In this project, a
courseware called Awk-Linux is proposed. The basic hardware functions
provided by Awk-Linux include timer interrupt and page-fault interrupt,
which are simulated through program instrumentation over user programs.

A major advantange of the use of Awk for this tool is platform
independence. Awk-Linux can be crafted relatively more easily and it does
not depend on any hardware simulator or platform. Stable Awk versions run
on many platforms so this tool can be readily and easily ported to other
machines. The same can *not* be said for other, more complex operating
systems courseware that may be much harder to port to new environments.

In practice, using Awk-Linux is very simple for the instructor and
students:

+ Course projects based on Awk-Linux provides source code extracted and
  simplified from a Linux kernel.
+ Results of our study indicate that the projects helped students better
  to understand inner workings of operating systems.

## Awk

Gawk under cygwin or Linux

## Platform

Windows (CYGWIN required) or Linux

## Uses

C programming language

## Current

Status 3 (Released)

##  Use
 
3(Free/public domain) 

## DateDeployed

2004

## References

Yung-Pin Cheng, Janet Mei-Chuen Lin, [Awk-Linux: A Lightweight Operating
Systems Courseware][1]  
IEEE Transactions on Education, vol. 51, issue 4, pp. 461-467, 2008.

## Url

**(TODO: Change dead link)** <http://www.csie.ntnu.edu.tw/~ypc/awklinux.htm>

[1]: http://lawker.googlecode.com/svn/fridge/share/pdf/awklinux.pdf
