---
layout: default
title: Name
tags: [awk100, template]
permalink: /awk100/template.html
---

# {{ page.title }}

What it is conventionally called in the documentation.

## Purpose

(Up to 20 words)

## Developers

People mainly responsible.

## Organization

Directing or sponsoring the work.

## Country

In which developed.

## Domain

The work area and activity to which this is relevant.  Try and be as
specific as possible. e.g.: SysAdmin, Decision Support, Cad/Cam. General
descriptions uch as GUI or Database should be used only if the product
is directly useful for several work areas.

## Contact

Name of someone who can answer questions, with

## Email

Address (or fax number) for the contact (if known.)

## Description

(Up to 150 words)

## Awk

Name of interpreter/compiler(s) used.

## Shell
 
If Awk was used as part of some shell script, what shell was used? 

## Platform

Hardware/operating system(s) (development/delivery.)

## Uses

Other languages or systems used, with approximate extent.

## Lines

Approximate number of lines of code.

## DevelopmentEffort

Number of person-months for initial system.

## MaintenanceEffort

Number of person-months since, including enhancements.

## Current

Status 1=Prototype, 2=Evaluation, 3=Released, 4=No longer supported, 5=Dead

## Use
 
1=Personal use, 2=in-House use, 3=Free/public domain, 4=Licensed, 5=Sold product 

## Users

Approximate number.

## DateDeployed

Month/year of inital practical use of program.

## Dated

Date to which this information refers.

## References

Citations of published or available work, if any.

## Url

Web address for more info, if available.
