---
layout: default
title: XMLgawk
tags: [awk100, xmlgawk, xml, gawk, external_links, dead_links, TODO]
---

# {{ page.title }}

*Editor's note: Programmers often take awk "as is", never thinking to
use it as a lab in which they can explore other language extensions.
An alternate approach is to treat the Awk code base as a reusable library
of parsers, regular expression engines, etc etc and to make modifications
to the language. This second approach is taken in the [Awk A\*][1]
project and, as shown here, in XMLgawk.*

*IMHO, XMLgawk is one of the most exciting new innovations seen in Gawk
for many years.  It shows that Awk is more than "just" a text processor:
rather it is also a  candidate technology for modern XML-based web
applications.*

## Purpose

Extends standard gawk with built-in XML processing.

## Developers

Main developers: Jurgen Kahrs and Andrew Schorr.

Conceptual guidance: Manuel Collado.

MS Windows build expert: Victor Paeza.

Contributor of ideas for new features: Peter Saveliev.

## Domain
 
XML processing, plus libraries for other extensions to Gawk.

## Description
 
XMLgawk is an experimental extension of the GNU Awk interpreter.
It includes a small XML parsing library which is built upon the Expat
XML parser. The parsing library is a very thin layer on top of Expat
(implementing a pull-interface) and can also be used without GNU Awk to
read XML data files.

Both, XMLgawk and its XML puller library only require an ANSI C compatible
compiler (GCC works, as do most vendors' ANSI C compilers) and a 'make'
program.

XMLgawk provides the following functionality including:

+ AWK's way of reading data line by line is supplemented by reading XML
  files node by node.
+ XMLgawk can load .awk file as <em>as well as</em> shared libraries.
+ Adds support for an @include directive in the source code. This is
  the same feature provided by the current igawk script.

## Current

3=Released

##  Use
 
3=Free/public domain.

## Date Deployed
 
November 2003.

## Dated
 
April 28, 2009.

## Url

+ **(TODO: Fix dead links)** [Documentation][2];
+ **(TODO: Fix dead links)** [Web site][3].

[1]: http://awk.info/?awkastar
[2]: http://home.vrweb.de/~juergen.kahrs/gawk/XML/xmlgawk.html
[3]: http://home.vrweb.de/~juergen.kahrs/gawk/XML/
