---
layout: default
title: Boris
tags: [awk100, external_links, gawk]
---

# Boris

## Purpose

Demonstration to DoD of a clustering algorithm suitable for streaming data.

## Source code

[gawk/awk100/boris][1]

## Live demo

<http://www.cse.wustl.edu/~loui/boris.cgi>.

## Developers

Ronald Loui and a programmer named Boris.

## Organization

Washington University in St. Louis, CS Dept.

## Country

USA

## Domain

This is an evolutionary algorithm and visualization of a clustering
algorithm that could be turned from O(n^4) to O(nlogn) with a few
judicious uses of constants.  Later developments added other interactive
devices, including progress meters and mouse-and-click behavior.

## Contact

Ronald Loui

## Email

<r.p.loui@gmail.com>

## Description

The code is an excellent example of the power of Awk as a prototyping
tool: after getting the code running, with the least development time,
a quirk was observed in the code that allowed a reduction from O(n^4)
to O(nlogn).

+ Two of the n's are lost (n^2) by noticing that when there is a swap,
  the delta in the scoring function falls off by the squared distance from
  the point of a swap.  So if you just set a constant, such as 10 or 20,
  or 100, based on the expected size of your clusters, then you can stop
  calculating the scoring function when you get past that constant.
+ The other n comes from either fixing the size of the matrix, and
  occasionally flushing new candidates in and out, or else by sampling
  over a subset of the n when you calculate the score.
+ The nlogn remains because there is a sort every now and then.


## Awk
 
Gawk

## Platform 

Intended for fast servers, 1+ ghz.

## Uses
 
Html.

## Lines
 
158.

## Development Effort
 
One weekend.

## Maintenance Effort
 
None.

## Current

2=Evaluation.

##  Use
 
2=in-House use.

## Users
 
5

## DateDeployed
 
2004.

## Dated
 
Feb 2009.

## References
 
Streaming Hierarchical Clustering for Concept Mining  
Looks, M.; Levine, A.; Covington, G.A.; Loui, R.P.; Lockwood, J.W.; Cho, Y.H.  
Aerospace Conference, 2007 IEEE  
Volume , Issue , 3-10 March 2007 Page(s):1 - 12  
Digital Object Identifier   10.1109/AERO.2007.352792

[1]: http://code.google.com/p/lawker/source/browse/fridge/gawk/awk100/boris/
